If it wields influence like a government, and it organizes

> The First Amendment prevents the US government from restricting speech; it does not govern whether and how private institutions limit speech.

The First Amendment applies to the US government, yes. Broadly speaking, Facebook has legal leeway to limit speech, even arbitrarily, because the First Amendment protects Facebook rather than governing it.

But why does the US government have the First Amendment? Why did Facebook and Twitter write a limitation to hate speech into their user policies? Why do they protect anonymous speech? What role does hate speech play on these platforms, and why is it protected by the US government? Why isn't hate speech protected by European governments?

Consider: Facebook is a government unto itself. It is ruled by shareholders, market forces, the governments of the localities in which it operates, and Mark Zuckerburg. Its user policies evoke democratic principles, and in its official justice system, those who operate Facebook are the judge, jury, and executioner.

Reports of community standards violations may come users who submit complaints. These reports may also be generated by auditing systems that use machine learning to inform their search for rule violations.

Employees and algorithms, guided by company policies and artificial intelligence, judge whether content violates Facebook's community standards.

During user policy enforcement decisions, the evidence is brought by the complaintant, and the defendant is typically contacted after Facebook has decided whether to remove the content. Only in cases of account disablement may users appeal the decision, but this does not cover cases Facebook deems "severe". https://www.facebook.com/help/103873106370583

